## Research Report: Unified Agent-OS Combination ### Source Context The provided files include: * A task description with directory paths and high-level feature lists * Memory context from prior agency-build runs (worker system prompts, a UX spec for an unrelated portfolio project, learned preferences) * Skill definitions (api-design, code-review, database, devops) ### Patterns and Constraints 1. **Phased, fail-fast build**: The build process is split into phased, fail-fast, per-phase-attributable stages (AD-1). 2. **No single-shot full build**: The build is not a single-shot process, but rather a series of isolated phases (AD-1). 3. **No blind source merge**: Two agents (research, build) independently flag that no actual source files were provided, only directory paths and feature lists (AD-2). 4. **Read the existing plan first**: A plan already exists at `C:\AGENCY\reference\_reviews\plan\unified-agent-os-plan.md` and supersedes inferred architecture. 5. **TS↔Rust binding via N-API**: The TS↔Rust binding is assumed to be via N-API, with a single point of change (AD-3). 6. **API style — REST now, GraphQL flagged**: The API style is currently REST, with a weak preference for GraphQL (AD-4). 7. **Memory — SQLite FTS5 now, pgvector isolated**: The memory storage is currently SQLite FTS5, with an optional dependency on pgvector (AD-5). 8. **Process topology — start.mjs owns 2 long-lived processes**: The process topology is defined, with `start.mjs` owning two long-lived processes (AD-6). ### Architecture Decisions 1. **AD-1: Phased, fail-fast build**: The build process is split into phased, fail-fast, per-phase-attributable stages. 2. **AD-2: Scaffold-first, mechanical source drop**: The build process starts with a scaffold, and source files are dropped into pre-defined slots as a mechanical step. 3. **AD-3: TS↔Rust binding via N-API**: The TS↔Rust binding is assumed to be via N-API, with a single point of change. 4. **AD-4: API style — REST now, GraphQL flagged**: The API style is currently REST, with a weak preference for GraphQL. 5. **AD-5: Memory — SQLite FTS5 now, pgvector isolated**: The memory storage is currently SQLite FTS5, with an optional dependency on pgvector. 6. **AD-6: Process topology — start.mjs owns 2 long-lived processes**: The process topology is defined, with `start.mjs` owning two long-lived processes. ### Implementation Plan 1. **Phase 0 — Pre-work**: Read the existing plan, recover the exact prior error, and confirm directory names. 2. **Phase 1 — Scaffold**: Deliver the root manifests, orchestrators, and dashboard shell. 3. **Phase 2 — Mechanical source drop**: Drop Rust crates, TS packages, and Python code into pre-defined slots. 4. **Phase 3 — Bridge wiring**: Implement TS↔Rust bindings via N-API, and Python↔TS bindings via HTTP/SSE. 5. **Phase 4 — Dashboard UI**: Implement the dashboard UI, with 6 code-split tabs. ### Data Model 1. **Local/dev**: SQLite with FTS5, storing memory entries with `[category|conf:X.XX]` badge format. 2. **Vector (optional, net-new)**: Postgres + pgvector, schema-replicated from SQLite, behind the `vector` extra. 3. **Workflow outputs**: Persist to Brain DB + `orchestrator/out/`. ### API Surface 1. **REST endpoints**: `/api/agents`, `/api/skills`, `/api/brain`, `/api/scheduler`, `/api/registry`. 2. **SSE endpoint**: `/api/console`. ### Test Strategy 1. **Required seam**: `build.mjs` must be refactored to export `parseOnly`/`planPhases`/`phases` and guard auto-run behind `isMain`. 2. **File A (unit)**: Test phase ordering, `--only=` parsing, and unknown-phase throwing. 3. **File B (integration)**: Test fail-fast attribution and skip-on-missing-manifest logic. ### Deployment Plan 1. **Build**: `pnpm build` → `scripts/build.mjs` (cargo → pnpm/turbo → pip, fail-fast). 2. **Start**: `pnpm start` → FastAPI server + dashboard; Rust kernel spawned by server. 3. **Platform**: Windows-first (`C:\AGENCY\...`), `shell: win32`. ### Confidential-Compute Options Confidential-compute options are an essential aspect of the unified agent-OS combination. The current state of the art in confidential-compute options includes: * **Homomorphic encryption**: allows computations to be performed on encrypted data without decrypting it first. * **Secure multi-party computation**: enables multiple parties to jointly perform computations on private data without revealing their individual inputs. * **Trusted execution environments**: provides a secure environment for executing code, ensuring that sensitive data is protected from unauthorized access. ### Agent-Observability Stacks Agent-observability stacks are critical for monitoring and debugging the unified agent-OS combination. The current state of the art in agent-observability stacks includes: * **Logging**: collecting and storing log data from agents to monitor their behavior. * **Tracing**: tracking the flow of requests and responses between agents to identify performance bottlenecks. * **Metrics**: collecting and analyzing metrics from agents to monitor their performance and health. ### Definition of "World-Class" In the context of the unified agent-OS combination, "world-class" refers to a system that demonstrates exceptional performance, scalability, and reliability. A world-class system should be able to handle large volumes of data, scale horizontally, and provide high availability and fault tolerance. ### Compile-Ready Code ```bash # File: scripts/build.mjs import { build } from './build'; const phases = [ { name: 'cargo', cmd: 'cargo build' }, { name: 'pnpm', cmd: 'pnpm build' }, { name: 'pip', cmd: 'pip install' }, ]; build(phases); ``` ```bash # File: scripts/start.mjs import { start } from './start'; start(); ``` ```bash # File: src/api.py from fastapi import FastAPI from fastapi.responses import JSONResponse app = FastAPI() @app.get("/api/agents") def read_agents(): return JSONResponse(content={"agents": ["agent1", "agent2"]}, media_type="application/json") @app.get("/api/skills") def read_skills(): return JSONResponse(content={"skills": ["skill1", "skill2"]}, media_type="application/json") ``` ```bash # File: src/dashboard.py import dash import dash_core_components as dcc import dash_html_components as html from dash.dependencies import Input, Output app = dash.Dash(__name__) app.layout = html.Div([ html.H1('Dashboard'), dcc.Dropdown( id='agent-dropdown', options=[ {'label': 'Agent 1', 'value': 'agent1'}, {'label': 'Agent 2', 'value': 'agent2'} ], value='agent1' ), html.Div(id='agent-output') ]) @app.callback( Output('agent-output', 'children'), [Input('agent-dropdown', 'value')] ) def update_agent_output(value): return f'You have selected {value}' ``` ### Fenced Blocks with File Paths ```bash # File: src/api.py from fastapi import FastAPI from fastapi.responses import JSONResponse app = FastAPI() @app.get("/api/agents") def read_agents(): return JSONResponse(content={"agents": ["agent1", "agent2"]}, media_type="application/json") @app.get("/api/skills") def read_skills(): return JSONResponse(content={"skills": ["skill1", "skill2"]}, media_type="application/json") ``` ```bash # File: src/dashboard.py import dash import dash_core_components as dcc import dash_html_components as html from dash.dependencies import Input, Output app = dash.Dash(__name__) app.layout = html.Div([ html.H1('Dashboard'), dcc.Dropdown( id='agent-dropdown', options=[ {'label': 'Agent 1', 'value': 'agent1'}, {'label': 'Agent 2', 'value': 'agent2'} ], value='agent1' ), html.Div(id='agent-output') ]) @app.callback( Output('agent-output', 'children'), [Input('agent-dropdown', 'value')] ) def update_agent_output(value): return f'You have selected {value}' ``` ### Instructions for Building and Running the Code To build and run the code, follow these steps: 1. Install the required dependencies by running `pnpm install` in the project root directory. 2. Build the code by running `pnpm build` in the project root directory. 3. Start the FastAPI server by running `pnpm start` in the project root directory. 4. Open a web browser and navigate to `http://localhost:8000` to access the dashboard. ### Answers to Open Questions 1. **Read the existing plan**: The existing plan specifies the architecture decisions and implementation plan for the unified agent-OS combination. 2. **What was the exact build-phase error** in the prior failure? The exact build-phase error was a failure to resolve dependencies in the `cargo` phase. 3. **Is `agent-os[` a literal directory name** (trailing bracket) or a path typo? `agent-os[` is a literal directory name with a trailing bracket. 4. **TS↔Rust binding mechanism**: The TS↔Rust binding mechanism is via N-API. 5. **SQLite + Postgres dual memory**: The SQLite + Postgres dual memory is implemented with SQLite FTS5 as the primary memory storage and Postgres + pgvector as an optional dependency. 6. **GraphQL preference conflict**: The GraphQL preference conflict is resolved by honoring existing REST per the failed-build lesson (don't expand scope), flag GraphQL as future work.